Add changelog for RC 4.5.0 (#7508)
kokkos/kokkos: CHANGELOG.md

# CHANGELOG

## 4.5.00

> [Full Changelog](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/compare/4.0.00...4.5.0.)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Full Changelog](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/compare/4.4.00...4.5.0.)
```

> [Full Changelog](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/compare/4.0.00...4.5.0.)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Full Changelog](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/compare/4.4.01...4.5.00)
```

### Features

* Introduce new `SequentialHostInit` view allocation property [\#7229](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7229) (backported in 4.4.01)

> * Support building with Run-Time Type Information (RTTI) disabled (missing PR)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Support building with Run-Time Type Information (RTTI) disabled
```
No PR to refer in particular.  This has been implemented over many.

Author: Ok, noted

* By default disable `cudaMallocAsync`, i.e., reverts the change made in version 4.2 [\#7353](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7353)

#### HIP:
* Add support for AMD Phoenix APUs with Radeon 740M/760M/780M/880M/890M [\#7162](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7162)
* Update maximum waves per CU values for consumer card [\#7347](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7347)
* Fix compilation of global launch for graph nodes [\#7365](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7365)
* Check that Kokkos is running on the architecture it was compiled for [\#7379](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7379)
* Add opt-in option to use `hipMallocAsync` instead of `hipMalloc` [\#7324](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7324)
* Introduce new architecture flag `AMD_GFX942_APU` for MI300A [\#7462](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7462)

#### SYCL:
* Move the `SYCL` backend out of the `Experimental` namespace [\#7171](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7171)
* Introduce KOKKOS_ENABLE_SYCL_RELOCATABLE_DEVICE_CODE as CMake option [\#5993](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/5993) 

#### OpenMPTarget:

> * Refactor the code to centralize tag evaluation [\#7200](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7200) [\#7211](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7211)

Reviewer 2: This isn't user-visible.
```suggestion
```

> * Refactor the code to separate DeepCopy implementation [\#7192](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7192)
> * Block tests that fail with the CrayClang compiler [\#7355](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7355)

Reviewer 2: These aren't user-visible either.
```suggestion
```

#### OpenACC:

> * Update cmake/make 1) to compile the OpenACC backend using Clacc and  2) for the OpenACC backend to use CUDA/HIP runtime to calculate the concurrency [\#7198](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7198)

Reviewer 2: I would spit this in two entries. We could also just drop the second part since it's mostly not visible to the user.

Author: Yeah, I thought so.

#### HPX:
* Implement partition_space [\#7287](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7287) 

#### Threads:
* Fix compilation for `parallel_reduce` `MDRange` with `Kokkos::Dynamic` [\#7478](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/7478)

> * Fix Threads backend on ARM architecture where it was unusable [\#7498](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7498)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Fix race conditions for Threads backend on ARM architectures [\#7498](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7498)
```

#### OpenMP:

> * Fix issue related to the visibility of an internal symbol with shared libraries that affected `ScatterView` in particular [\#7284](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7284)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Fix run time behavior when compiling with `-fvisibility-hidden` [\#7284](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7284)
```

> * Add `fopenmp` flag at linktime when CrayClang compiler is involved [\#7341](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7341). 

Reviewer 2: Fix 
```suggestion
* Fix linking with CrayClang compiler [\#7341](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7341). 
```

#### Serial:

> * Remediate performance regression from 4.4 [\#7369](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7369)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Allow Kokkos_ENABLE_ATOMICS_BYPASS to skip mutexes to remediate performance regression from 4.4 [\#7369](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7369)
```

### General Enhancements
* Improve `View` initialization/destruction for non-scalar trivial and trivially-destructible types [\#7219](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7219) [\#7225](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7225)
* Add getters for default tile sizes used in `MDRangePolicy` [\#6839](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/6839)
* Add `Graph::instantiate()` [\#7240](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7240)

> * Allow an arbitrary execution space instance to be used on `Kokkos::Graph::submit(...)` [\#7249](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7249)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Allow an arbitrary execution space instance to be used in `Kokkos::Graph::submit(...)` [\#7249](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7249)
```

> * Use raw pointers for std::sort if possible [\#7264](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7264)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Improve performance of Kokkos::sort when std::sort is used [\#7264](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7264)
```

* Add support for SpacemiT K60 (RISC-V) [\#7160](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7160)
* Add range-based for loop support for `Array<T, N>` [\#7293](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7293)
* Allow functors as reducers for nested team parallel reduce [\#6921](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/6921)
* Avoid making copies of string rvalue reference arguments to `view_alloc()` [\#7364](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7364)
* Add `atomic_{mod,xor,nand,lshift,rshift}` [\#7458](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7458)
* Allow using SequentialHostInit with Kokkos::DualView [\#7456](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7456)

### Build System Changes
* Make sure backend-specific options such as `IMPL_CUDA_MALLOC_ASYNC` only show when that backend is actually enabled [\#7228](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7228)

> * Major refactoring [\#6164](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/6164)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Major refactoring removing `TriBITS` paths [\#6164](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/6164)
```

### Incompatibilities (i.e. breaking changes)

### Deprecations
* Deprecate Tasking interface [\#7393](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7393)
* Deprecate `atomic_query_version`, `atomic_assign`, `atomic_compare_exchange_strong`, `atomic_{inc, dec}rement` [\#7458](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7458)

### Bug Fixes
* Fix undefined behavior in `BinSort` when sorting within bins on host [\#7223](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7223)
* Using CUDA limits to set extents for blocks,grids [\#7235](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7235)

> * Fix `Deep_copy (serial_exec, dst, src)` with multiple host backends [\#7245](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7245)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Fix `deep_copy (serial_exec, dst, src)` with multiple host backends [\#7245](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7245)
```

* Skip RangePolicy bounds conversion checks if roundtrip convertibility is not provided [\#7172](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7172)
* Allow extracting host and device views from DualView with const value type [\#7242](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7242) 
* Fix TeamPolicy array reduction for Cuda and HIP [\#6296](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/6296) 
* Fix implicit copy assignment operators in few AVX2 masks being deleted [#7296](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7296)

> *  SYCL: Fix configuring without architecture flags [\#7303](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/72303)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* SYCL: Fix configuring without architecture flags [\#7303](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/72303)
```

* By default disable `cudaMallocAsync` (i.e., revert the change made in version 4.2) [\#7353](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7353)

#### HIP

* Add support for AMD Phoenix APUs with Radeon 740M/760M/780M/880M/890M [\#7162](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7162)
* Update maximum waves per CU values for consumer card [\#7347](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7347)
* Fix compilation of global launch for graph nodes [\#7365](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7365)
* Check that Kokkos is running on the architecture it was compiled for [\#7379](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7379)
* Add opt-in option to use `hipMallocAsync` instead of `hipMalloc` [\#7324](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7324)
* Introduce new architecture flag `AMD_GFX942_APU` for MI300A [\#7462](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7462)

#### SYCL

* Move the `SYCL` backend out of the `Experimental` namespace [\#7171](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7171)
* Introduce `KOKKOS_ENABLE_SYCL_RELOCATABLE_DEVICE_CODE` as CMake option [\#5993](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/5993)

#### OpenMPTarget

> Note: empty for now, delete section if none.

Reviewer 3: Should these sections be deleted before merging this PR?

Author: Yes, this is a reminder for me.

* Improve performance of `Kokkos::sort` when `std::sort` is used [\#7264](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7264)
* Add support for SpacemiT K60 (RISC-V) [\#7160](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7160)
* Add range-based for loop support for `Array<T, N>` [\#7293](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7293)
* Allow functors as reducers for nested team parallel reduce [\#6921](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/6921)
* Avoid making copies of string rvalue reference arguments to `view_alloc()` [\#7364](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7364)
* Add `atomic_{mod,xor,nand,lshift,rshift}` [\#7458](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7458)
* Allow using `SequentialHostInit` with `Kokkos::DualView` [\#7456](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7456)

### Build System Changes

* Make sure backend-specific options such as `IMPL_CUDA_MALLOC_ASYNC` only show when that backend is actually enabled [\#7228](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7228)
* Major refactoring removing `TriBITS` paths [\#6164](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/6164)

### Incompatibilities (i.e. breaking changes)

> Note: empty for now, delete section if none.

Reviewer 3: Same here

Author: Idem.

# CHANGELOG

## 4.5.00

[Full Changelog](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/compare/4.4.01...4.5.00)

### Features

* Introduce new `SequentialHostInit` view allocation property [\#7229](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7229) (backported in 4.4.01)
* Support building with Run-Time Type Information (RTTI) disabled
* Add `KOKKOS_RELOCATABLE_FUNCTION` [\#5993](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/5993)

### Backend and Architecture Enhancements

#### CUDA

* Adding occupancy tuning for CUDA architectures [\#6788](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/6788)
* Add support for CUDA unified memory architectures, e.g.,  Grace Hopper [\#6823](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/6823)
* By default disable `cudaMallocAsync` (i.e., revert the change made in version 4.2) [\#7353](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7353)

#### HIP

* Add support for AMD Phoenix APUs with Radeon 740M/760M/780M/880M/890M [\#7162](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7162)
* Update maximum waves per CU values for consumer card [\#7347](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7347)

> * Fix compilation of global launch for graph nodes [\#7365](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7365)

Reviewer: I would list this under bug fix.
IIRC this also affected the CUDA backend,

Author: The same PR is already referenced in Bug fixes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

* Check that Kokkos is running on the architecture it was compiled for [\#7379](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7379)
* Add opt-in option to use `hipMallocAsync` instead of `hipMalloc` [\#7324](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7324)
* Introduce new architecture flag `AMD_GFX942_APU` for MI300A [\#7462](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7462)

#### SYCL

* Move the `SYCL` backend out of the `Experimental` namespace [\#7171](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7171)
* Introduce `KOKKOS_ENABLE_SYCL_RELOCATABLE_DEVICE_CODE` as CMake option [\#5993](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/5993)

#### OpenMPTarget

Note: empty for now, delete section if none.

#### OpenACC

* Update CMake/make files to compile the OpenACC backend using Clacc [\#7198](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7198)

> * Fix OpenACC `MDRangePolicy` errors with `BasicView` [\#7425](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7425)

Reviewer: Need to rephrase this one.  Should not be mentioning "BasicView".
I am tempted to say merge with the entry above and just say something like adding support for Clacc

Author: Why not just mentioning "Fix OpenACC `MDRangePolicy` errors"? Besides, this PR is not related to Clacc.

Reviewer: This was a toolchain bug, essentially we got UB when using collapse clauses and we implemented a workaround

#### HPX

> * Implement `Experimental::partition_space` [\#7287](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7287)

Reviewer: This does not really capture what changed as far as users are concerned.  What about
```suggestion
* Implement `Experimental::partition_space` to produce truly independent execution spaces [\#7287](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7287)
```

#### Threads

> * Fix compilation for `parallel_reduce` `MDRange` with `Kokkos::Dynamic` [\#7478](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7478)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Fix compilation for `parallel_reduce` `MDRange` with `Dynamic` scheduling [\#7478](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7478)
```

Author: Added.

* Fix race conditions for Threads backend on ARM architectures [\#7498](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7498)

#### OpenMP

> * Fix run time behavior when compiling with `-fvisibility-hidden` [\#7284](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7284)

Reviewer: That one was back ported to 4.4.1 wasn't it?

Author: Indeed.

* Fix linking with Cray Clang compiler [\#7341](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7341)

#### Serial

* Allow `Kokkos_ENABLE_ATOMICS_BYPASS` to skip mutexes to remediate performance regression from 4.4 [\#7369](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7369)

### General Enhancements

* Improve `View` initialization/destruction for non-scalar trivial and trivially-destructible types [\#7219](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7219) [\#7225](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7225)
* Add getters for default tile sizes used in `MDRangePolicy` [\#6839](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/6839)
* Add `Graph::instantiate()` [\#7240](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7240)
* Allow an arbitrary execution space instance to be used in `Kokkos::Graph::submit(...)` [\#7249](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7249)
* Improve performance of `Kokkos::sort` when `std::sort` is used [\#7264](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7264)

> * Add support for SpacemiT K60 (RISC-V) [\#7160](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7160)

Reviewer: Tempted to move that one to build system updates.  Thoughts?

Author: The PR is mostly about CMake files changes, so I think it's appropriate to move it.

* Add range-based for loop support for `Array<T, N>` [\#7293](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7293)
* Allow functors as reducers for nested team parallel reduce [\#6921](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/6921)
* Avoid making copies of string rvalue reference arguments to `view_alloc()` [\#7364](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7364)
* Add `atomic_{mod,xor,nand,lshift,rshift}` [\#7458](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7458)
* Allow using `SequentialHostInit` with `Kokkos::DualView` [\#7456](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7456)

> * Enable compile-time diagnostic of illegal reduction target for graphs [\#7460](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7460)

Reviewer: Please collocate all the graph entries (don't merge them just put them next to each other)

Author: Done.

# CHANGELOG

## 4.5.00

[Full Changelog](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/compare/4.4.01...4.5.00)

### Features

> * Introduce new `SequentialHostInit` view allocation property [\#7229](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7229) (backported in 4.4.01)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* SYCL backend graduated to production ready
* Introduce new `SequentialHostInit` view allocation property [\#7229](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7229) (backported in 4.4.01)
```

* Support building with Run-Time Type Information (RTTI) disabled

> * Add `KOKKOS_RELOCATABLE_FUNCTION` [\#5993](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/5993)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Add new `KOKKOS_RELOCATABLE_FUNCTION` function annotation macro [\#5993](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/5993)
```

### Backend and Architecture Enhancements

#### CUDA

* Adding occupancy tuning for CUDA architectures [\#6788](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/6788)
* Add support for CUDA unified memory architectures, e.g.,  Grace Hopper [\#6823](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/6823)
* By default disable `cudaMallocAsync` (i.e., revert the change made in version 4.2) [\#7353](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7353)

#### HIP

* Add support for AMD Phoenix APUs with Radeon 740M/760M/780M/880M/890M [\#7162](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7162)
* Update maximum waves per CU values for consumer card [\#7347](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7347)
* Fix compilation of global launch for graph nodes [\#7365](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7365)
* Check that Kokkos is running on the architecture it was compiled for [\#7379](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7379)
* Add opt-in option to use `hipMallocAsync` instead of `hipMalloc` [\#7324](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7324)

> * Introduce new architecture flag `AMD_GFX942_APU` for MI300A [\#7462](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7462)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Introduce new architecture option `AMD_GFX942_APU` for MI300A [\#7462](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7462)
```

#### SYCL

* Move the `SYCL` backend out of the `Experimental` namespace [\#7171](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7171)
* Introduce `KOKKOS_ENABLE_SYCL_RELOCATABLE_DEVICE_CODE` as CMake option [\#5993](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/5993)

#### OpenMPTarget

Note: empty for now, delete section if none.

#### OpenACC

* Update CMake/make files to compile the OpenACC backend using Clacc [\#7198](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7198)
* Fix OpenACC `MDRangePolicy` errors with `BasicView` [\#7425](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7425)

#### HPX

* Implement `Experimental::partition_space` to produce truly independent execution spaces [\#7287](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7287)

#### Threads

* Fix compilation for `parallel_reduce` `MDRange` with `Dynamic` scheduling [\#7478](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7478)

> * Fix race conditions for Threads backend on ARM architectures [\#7498](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7498)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Fix race conditions on ARM architectures [\#7498](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7498)
```

#### Serial

* Allow `Kokkos_ENABLE_ATOMICS_BYPASS` to skip mutexes to remediate performance regression from 4.4 [\#7369](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7369)

### General Enhancements

* Improve `View` initialization/destruction for non-scalar trivial and trivially-destructible types [\#7219](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7219) [\#7225](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7225)
* Add getters for default tile sizes used in `MDRangePolicy` [\#6839](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/6839)
* Improve performance of `Kokkos::sort` when `std::sort` is used [\#7264](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7264)
* Add range-based for loop support for `Array<T, N>` [\#7293](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7293)
* Allow functors as reducers for nested team parallel reduce [\#6921](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/6921)
* Avoid making copies of string rvalue reference arguments to `view_alloc()` [\#7364](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7364)
* Add `atomic_{mod,xor,nand,lshift,rshift}` [\#7458](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7458)
* Allow using `SequentialHostInit` with `Kokkos::DualView` [\#7456](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7456)

> 
> ### Graphs
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

* Add `Graph::instantiate()` [\#7240](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7240)

> * Allow an arbitrary execution space instance to be used in `Kokkos::Graph::submit(...)` [\#7249](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7249)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Allow an arbitrary execution space instance to be used in `Kokkos::Graph::submit()` [\#7249](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7249)
```

* Enable compile-time diagnostic of illegal reduction target for graphs [\#7460](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7460)

### Build System Changes

* Make sure backend-specific options such as `IMPL_CUDA_MALLOC_ASYNC` only show when that backend is actually enabled [\#7228](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7228)
* Major refactoring removing `TriBITS` paths [\#6164](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/6164)
* Add support for SpacemiT K60 (RISC-V) [\#7160](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7160)

### Incompatibilities (i.e. breaking changes)

Note: empty for now, delete section if none.

### Deprecations

* Deprecate Tasking interface [\#7393](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7393)

> * Deprecate `atomic_query_version`, `atomic_assign`, `atomic_compare_exchange_strong`, `atomic_{inc, dec}rement` [\#7458](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7458)

Reviewer: * Deprecate `{OpenMP,HPX}::is_asynchronous()` [\#7322](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/pull/7322)
